passengers in the boat became panicky
the boat is going to capsize at any
time then this
Helmsman looking at this sheer
omniscience present before him tells him
sir do you know how to swim so no so
whole life is
gone so this is an extraordinary story
which tells us that mere knowledge which
does not help us to swim across the
currents and crosscurrents of life and
to negotiate the difficulties which will
naturally come to everybody as long as
he or she is alive that kind of
knowledge is absolutely
useless the educational system which we
have inherited unfortunately from the
British from which we are struggling to
come out even
now gives us that
knowledge gives us degrees but these
degrees are absolutely
useless as long as you have not learned
the art of swimming through
life it was Lord M who pronounced 1835
all of us
know that we should give these Indians
such an education by
which they
will appear to be Indians from
outside but inwardly they will be
absolutely and thoroughly
anglicized and they will serve the cause
of the British
Empire even now the then British Capital
Kolkata has the Secretariat named
writers
buildings they were preparing writers
and clerks to serve the cause of the
British
India M almost successfully did
it interestingly just a year later
1836 SRI ramakrishna was born in an
unknown Village in Bengal absolutely and
totally rejected the M brand of
education and picked up some of his
brightest young men as disciples who
were educated they may call a way the
chief most among them as you know is
Swami
vianda the kind of education which we
have inherited from the
British which will make you have plenty
of knowledge and
information but which is not in
integrated with your life and
action that has
completely taken away our
self-respect and the capacity to be able
to originally think and integrate with
the masses around
us the kind of integral
education which Swami vianda and some of
the sters in India R tagor and Mahatma
Gandhi all of them spoke about is that
which actually enables you to live a
life in which the principles which you
have learned in through education have
been internalized and actualized in
daily life and
action we have become
mechanized and this
it information
technology has been a great Boon to us
unfortunately reducing a human being
into mere robot I will tell you another
story from one of the books recent books
by rer Penrose rer Penrose is a living
mathematician and a physicist he's
written plenty of books the first book
he wrote was emperor's new mind you know
the story of The Emperor's New
Clothes a king was parading without
clothes and nobody dared to tell him
everybody said ah you are so wonderful a
small boy gets up and say and says the
king is not wearing any clothes so as a
parody to this he wrote a book emperor's
new
mind that was a challenge to artificial
intelligence they call it Ai and there's
a weak Ai and a strong
Ai and the protagonist of the artificial
intelligence claim that a machine can
exactly do all the jobs which the human
brain is capable of doing and soon a
time will come we will completely
replace the human mind itself through
artificial intelligence wait give us
some time a couple of years more a
couple of decades more and we will see
that the artificial intelligence takes
over the human intelligence as a parody
to this as a challenge to this he wrote
this book and begins it with a very
interesting story the story is a super
super computer is being inaugurated in
the United
States and the president and all the
technocrats are present there the
inventor of this computer with great
pride tells everybody now ladies and
gentlemen we are going to inaugurate a
super
computer which can answer any question
within nanocs and
micros I will have a new way of
inaugurating it which one of you in the
audience will put the first question in
order to inaugurate this
computer nobody
Rose who will display a stupidity before
a super
omniscience a small boy innocent boy got
up that is the beauty of children they
tell her the truth very innocently and
openly a boy got up and said sir I will
put the first
question everybody said after all he is
a boy he doesn't mind displaying his
stupidity come on tell me a
kid what is the question you are putting
to the
computer he asked the computer you
please tell me how how does it feel to
be a
computer the gadgets went around and
there the there's a flash of light and
it calculated for an hour and said I do
not
know there's a big uproar everywhere a
computer a super computer can do
everything in a Trice does not know how
it feels to be a
computer this is a very remarkable
lesson we have to learn that to be good
human beings is much more important to
be great knowledgeable beings Albert
Einstein makes a very stinging
remark reflection of what band said
years ago Albert Einstein said we don't
need to teach any speciality in school
stuff them with all kinds of things
teach them how to live the life in a
balanced way appreciation of values
appreciation of Beauty in nature
having a Compassionate Heart learning
from nature and learning to live happily
harmoniously with your fellow beings
these are values which need to be taught
in school and knowledge learned in
school will flourish and flower only if
a person grows up as a good human being
what the greatest dir in our country we
have so many resources we have so much
of technology and the country is the
Great Awakening is taking place in the
country we for everybody to see but what
we do lack is men and women of
impeccable
character who cannot be
Leed by greed and the flesh a great dir
of people who can stand up and say we
are human beings and we shall not stoop
so low I have a Dignity of my own and
there's a spark of divinity within me
which I'm trying to manifest
this is a great dir and therefore
Einstein said if we can train these
young boys and girls in schools to be
very clever people and to have a plenty
of
knowledge we are having trained animals
like in Circus but we would have failed
to create integral total human beings
this is the message which vianda and
others told us you have yoga is a total
integral
education the exercises which we perform
in yoga is only a very small part of
yoga as you know the patanjalis yoga
sutras talk about the Ashtanga Yoga
being being beginning with Yama and Nama
which are ethical and moral values
ethical and moral values are so
fundamental to human life that leaving
them alone all your exercise will simply
vanish into nothingness
therefore the ancient rishis and munis
based ethical and moral values Buddha
spoke about it Christ spoke about it
Muhammad spoke about it all the
religions talk about ethical and moral
life that is the basis unfortunately it
appears the Ashtanga Yoga is get reduced
to shanga yoga you begin with Asa
straight away Yama then only Asana comes
in the patanjali's
hierarchy so Swami VI's idea was this
yoga should be taught to people so that
they become complete
integral harmoniously developed
personalities the means for that he
said is very simple it's very
psychological as well as philosophical
there's nothing philosophic nothing
metaphysical nothing mysterious about
yoga we have mystified yoga a little too
much perhaps and we have some people
have monopolized to this yoga now it is
coming out in a big way to transform
people's lives not only the physical
health but the health of a human being
in a complete and holistic way Swami
Vanda therefore said there are four
fundamental faculties in a human being
the most fundamental faculty which every
one of us
has is the feeling you may not be
educated in the proper in the
conventional way you may not have
degrees but every one of us has a
feeling of love feeling of United and
the basis of all yoga is to unite is to
connect now the cell phones and the
mobile phones and the internet
everywhere is an example of how
everybody wants to be connected
interconnected what is the basic urge in
a human heart was a question asked by
psychologist olist and philosophers over
the years frud say something Adler say
something else Frankle said something
else and so on but the most fundamental
human urge is to be
interconnected is to live in society so
that you are connected with everybody
else if you don't have the mobile phone
in your pocket for half a minute you
feel so Restless not that you use it all
the time but because you have a feel
of being interconnected with the entire
universe so we have the entire universe
with you the
interconnectedness is a part of yoga the
moment you come out of this the moment
you feel disconnected you feel uneasy
which called duka so the Bhagavad Gita
says in a sense yoga is voga Union is
disunion
says is Yoga so you are disconnected
from dukka and dukka comes to you
because you don't feel connected the
feeling of connectedness which everybody
feels in his heart that is the most
fundamental feeling of Love which
connects that everybody has and this
training by which this faculty of Love
is channeled and purified is called bti
yoga there are some people who are
extremely analytical great thinkers they
think about everything what's calleda
they think about it they philosophize
and deeply go into problems these are
the people who are trained as Gana yogin
the third category of people who are
extremely active they want to do good to
people they go around the Good
Samaritans and then who feel intensely
for others misery they do action these
acting people active people are called
karma yogin the fourth category is a set
of people
who are
meditative they don't like crowds they
don't want to mix with people they
calmly sit and meditate and discover
great truths from the depths of their
Consciousness they are the meditative
people who areana yogis or Raj yogis
Swami vian's idea was
that each one of this yoga has its own
difficulty has its own advantages and
disadvantages what are they a Gana Yogi
a person of great
thought may become so dry he doesn't
feel for
others a b Yogi who has great feeling
for others may end up being extremely
sentimental and emotional he doesn't he
doesn't best of deep thought on anything
so a combination of these two is
required and a gani and a
baka they may have great visions and
great feeling tremendous plans but when
it comes to executing them at the ground
level these people may be total failures
so what you need is to combine karma
yoga with that and selfish work for the
sake of others and even that is not
sufficient a gani and a Baka and a Karm
Yogi all of them need to calm their
minds
the great ver
thean calming yourself your limbs your
body your mind calm
demor calmness is absolutely required
the prity of the Mind the Tranquility of
the mind he is a gyana yogi so Swami
viand therefore
said I'll just end up with a couple of
slides
just a couple of SLS so I will not go
into the philosophical depth I just
wanted to give a glimpse of how much or
ancient is thought about the human
personality this is the pcha kosha it is
called five selves the Anaya pranaya
Manaya Vaya and the anandaya the five
dimensions of a human personality and
each one of them should be completely
and fully developed we idea was there
should not be any deficiency in the
development of any of them and the
Tantra yoga Tantra and vedanta all of
them are disciplines which developed
together and the present approach as
vianda said should be an integral
approach to all this the sh chakras I
will not go into the details and the
vanta talks about three
AAS the waking dream and deep sleep and
yoga vanta talks about a u m om a
standing for the waking State U for the
dream state and M for the Deep Sleep
State all together takes you to a
transcendental state which is called
tuya and then the Veda talks about sa
Locas and this is the Tantra vant Tantra
Veda Paradigm which have
integrated and the harmony of religions
with viand talked about the wonderful
Harmony ious blend of Gana biti and
Karma with yoga interpenetrating and
enveloping the whole thing as intensity
of longing and aspiration we refer here
to the beautiful artistic emblem which
Swami Vivekananda himself designed for
the ram Krishna
Mission how to practice this in a daily
life just one word about it there is a
practical hint from a book by Swami
ganeshwar Ananda on yoga for beginners
this is wonderful book those of you and
get a copy of this yoga for beginners in
which discusses all these four yogas in
detail and gives you practical hints of
how to practice them in Daily Life Begin
the day with Raj yoga prayer meditation
will give you an undercurrent of poise
and peace like the ringing of lingering
sound of a bell when you ling a bell it
lingers for a long time this meditation
and the peace that you get through
calmness will take you the whole day be
a B Yoga in your contact with others see
God and everything and worship to him
offer worship to him in the field of
action be a Karm Yogi work for the sake
of work let your work be your worship
last but not least that your life be
balanced and controlled by the intellect
knowledge of fundamental principles
gives you the latitude and the power of
adjustment Swami vianda designed this
beautiful emblem in which he said said
the Lotus represents bti the wavy Waters
represents Karma the Rising Sun
represents Gana and
enveloping serpent which is the gundal
Shi represents yoga and the meaning of
the picture is by a combination of Gana
bii Karma and yoga the vision of the
paramatman represent the swan in the
picture is attained thank you om shant
shant shant
har
[Applause]
omish
G
for
oh
[Music]
[Applause]
oh
[Music]
Guru
brah
[Music]
muru
[Applause]
[Music]
oh
t
[Music]
v
oh
[Music]
my
oh
[Music]
am
oh
[Music]
s
Shanty
[Music]
shanty
thanks children for an electrifying
performance our ancient education system
talks about three types of strengths
available to human beings bah balam
buddhi balam yoga balam or Atma balum
education should aim at a parallel
development of all these three strengths
with this in mind the National Council
for Teacher education has made yoga
education a compulsory area of study in
all the 18,000 plus teacher education
institutions and has come out with three
yoga education modules for bed Ed and
diploma in elementary education I
request Professor Santosh pandai
chairperson
NCT s jugal singhh Professor BS duger
professor ra and Atma priyananda G is
already there request honorable minister
of human resource development government
of India shrimati smti Rani G to release
these
books
than
[Applause]
e
for